This project was developed using GitHub, Visual Studio Code, and various Python libraries.

This project consists of a dashboard divided into 6 pages. The first one which you are reading, is meant as a presentation of the work. 

The second one presents data from a dataset which showcases the exchanges of gas through specific ports, including quantities, between European nations and their main trading partners through time. The user can explore the exchanged quantities over time, between nations by selecting the main country in a map and the second country from its list of partners. The data is registered monthly, and the dashboard also provides a slider to have the possibility to focus on a specific period. Then, the graph can be saved in the work directory of the code (for this, the kaleido library must be installed – it’s not included in the work directory due to its large size).  

The third page's aim is to give the possibility to the user to analyze the level of autocorrelation of the data shown in the second page. Both simple and partial autocorrelation graphs are provided, to provide ideas for future studies, without involving other additional information.   

In the fourth panel, the results of data collection and cleaning are showcased. Most of the used datasets used come from Eurostat. Other sources include IEA, Ourworldindata and Entsoe. The user can plot features of different countries and compare their gas imports, population, energy mix among others. It is also shown that the work would focus on a single country as a general model, if even possible, would require huge amount of complexity beyond the scope of this course and our possibilities. The choice of the country was made to the following criteria: the country had to have a high dependency on gas for electricity production, relevant data should have been complete and continuous through years. Out of the few countries which responded well to these criteria, we chose Italy as its data was easily interpretable and well correlated.

In the fifth panel we focus the work on Italy. A text with the main conclusions from the data analysis drawn is presented, along with the features focusing on the country. It’s possible to view data in full scale or in the normalized scale. 

The last panel presents the result of our regression model if forecasted in the period from 2020 to 2023, taking data from the previous years and forecasting Italian gas imports. Then, a comparison can be done between the real data and the forecasted data, so that one can evaluate the impact of the pandemic and of the russo-ukrainian war on the Italian imports. 

The work was inspired by a dataset containing gas exchanges between countries in specific exchange ports, which sparked our interest in the topic of gas commerce and dependency. Our curiosity on the effects of covid and the russo-ukrainian war prompted us to go deeper and use our tools to see the difference these events made in Europe, and then to focus on our country.

First, we collected data from many sources and for all countries we could find. Searching, finding, and merging different datasets from different sources was a long part of our work, with the biggest burden being our will to perform a month-by-month analysis. We restricted our search to what were, in our opinion, impacted sectors or indicators correlated to energy or good candidates as features for the forecast. Then, an exploratory data analysis was performed to see the impacts in all of Europe.

We then chose to focus on Italy. After some data cleaning and completion (energy mix, in which we verified the compatibility of datasets) a second analysis on features was developed, both monthly and biannually since gas/electricity prices were available only in these timeframes. The analysis was also carried out with data only before 2020 and the full dataset, separately. After that, feature engineering was carried out to extract relevant features. Some of theme were subjected to a time series analysis for autocorrelation. The most useful features were derived from gas mass balances and through autocorrelation on parameters, with an exception being an analytic model based on a sine wave to describe the ‘ratio’ feature, which is the instant ratio between the gas imported by Italy and the amount of gas consumed by it. Autocorrelation was carried out since any data after 2019 was affected by the world events, and so any predictive model used on that data would lead to wrong result, or would just prove that a model cannot be used for data which it hasn’t been trained for, which would be trivial. We generated data for the 4 years following 2019 with high fidelity, and then used that same data on the selected features to regress gas imports. The feature “gas imported last month” was generated by using the forecasted import on the previous month, regarding it as true. To limit error propagation, we used two models: one trained on the years before 2020 to forecast 2020 and 2021 and another one trained on years before 2022 to forecast 2022 and 2023. To our surprise, the model trained on data only up to 2020 forecasted years 2022 and 2023 similar to the other one, we decided to keep the forecasts of both models nevertheless.

This work can represent a benchmark for estimating impacts on gas imports and exports variations during uncertain times following global events. The analysis can be repeated and extended for other countries and regions of the world and events, and for other quantities of interest: one could see the impact on GDP, electricity price, employment and so forth by following the same approach. If it wasn’t beyond the scope of the project, we would have been very curious to see the impact on gas and energy prices, as well as trading partners and ports used.


Credits
Antonio Succi (ist111480) - Data collection and cleaning, data analysis, regression models
Gaia Pascucci (ist108713) - Brief data collection and cleaning, dashboard
Nicola Guerra (ist111380) - Data collection and cleaning, data analysis, feature selection and engineering, feature generation
